Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes, and
today I'm joined by Dr. Rafael Nunez. He's a
professor of cognitive science at the University of California
San Diego. He investigates cognition from the perspective of
the embodied mind, and today we're going to talk
about embodied cognition, time and space, and numerical cognition
and mathematics. So Dr. Nunez, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thanks for the invitation.
So let me start by asking you then, what
is embodied cognition and in what ways does it
differ from other approaches in the cognitive sciences?
Well, embodied cognition is a, is a large umbrella
term that captures, I would say, many different, um,
approaches. Um, THEY'RE not homogeneous, I would say, uh,
but they're all share like uh some kind of
interest in, um, that came out more late, more
or less in the 1980s, 1990s. Um, AS a
way of, uh, answering to a dissatisfaction, which was
like a, a purely digital sort of, uh, information
processing view of the mind. And incorporating, you know,
features that concerns, you know, the body, the anatomy,
uh, anchored in the physiological constraints of our, not
just our human, but animality in general. And this
can, you know, took different forms. Some of them
had to do with anatomy. Other things had to
do more with bodily experience, more phenomenological, and so
on. So I wouldn't say it's just one coherent
view, but it's like a, you know, like a
large response sort of uh for this more purely
abstract formal, uh, formally driven approaches to analyze the
mind. So that's would be my, my short, you
know, characterization of embodied cognition. So that, you know,
depends on who you ask. Some people may be
doing, um, You know, uh, work in robotics, for
example, exploring embodied cognition, uh, but then they wouldn't
necessarily deal with the question of phenomenology and bodily
experience, but other people will be doing that in
which, you know, the materiality of, uh, of the
agent is maybe less important and so on and
so forth. So, uh, there would, you would have
many different views under this big umbrella.
Right, but what does it mean for the mind
to be embodied, because you know, many times when
people think about the mind, they tend to associate
it with just the brain itself, but what does
it mean for it to be embodied?
Well, again, so, um, on the one hand, if
you just look at neuroscience, if, you know, there's
a tendency sometimes to reduce everything to the brain,
and, but, you know, the brain doesn't exist in
thin air, so the brain is part of a,
uh, you know, a larger nervous system, and the
larger system exists within the body with physiological, you
know, uh, constraints and, and metabolism and many other
things that relate to also. Uh, BODY morphology and
anatomy. So, um, in that case, you know, you,
there's an, an approach I would say in neuroscience,
you could say that, well, not to reduce everything
to the brain, but, you know, the brain in
the context of, of, of bodies. And then, of
course, you can go larger, right? Bodies don't exist
separate, they exist, especially in, in social animals. They
coexist with others and the, the ontogeny of individuals
when they grow up during lifetime, they are, you
know, fed and protected and carried and so on
by other bodies. So, all those things, um, uh,
in that case, embodied, embodied mind would be uh
analyzing. Um, INFANT, mother-infant interaction in, let's say primates
and all those things could be addressed or, um,
you know, studied through this angle, uh, and so
on and so forth. And then, of course, uh,
Another approaches of, let's say the mind being uh
like an abstract entity that has, you know, formal
laws for reasoning and, and deduction systems and so
on, uh, well, an embodied, an embodied approach to
analyzing this would be, well, let's take into consideration
the, the bodily constraints and that shape the forms
of reasoning and abstraction and so on. Um, SO
that, that would be kind of like the, the
way of dealing, uh, a shortcomings coming from the
purely abstract, let's say, characterization of the mind as
like logical reasoning step by step, or, or, and
so on.
Right, and of course we're going to get into
some some examples of this when in a bit
we talk about time and space and how we
process them cognitively, numbers and mathematics and numerical cognition,
but which aspects of human cognition can we understand
through a framework of embodied cognition?
Well, I would say. Um, IT would be a
question about, uh, reductionism in a way. So, in
science, there is a, you know, there's always a
necessity in which you need to. Go through a
step of um productionistic step to analyze a particular
object, whether it's uh global warming or uh COVID-19
epidemics or, you know, cognitive activity. At some point
in order to do an experiment or study, you
have to operationalize. Your variables and, and your factors
that you want to consider, um, so, you know,
even when you do, I don't know, the study
of unemployment in a society, you have to define
unemployment and probably your definition is not going to
capture all the richness of unemployment and you have
to define it. Is it Is it occurring, you
know, during a period of one day or one
week or all those things. So, the, the question
of um operationalizing different aspects uh of, of cognition
um necessarily lead to this step. So the question
here now is how much you're willing to reduce,
you know, in this reductionistic step. And I would
say in the 70s, or, you know, with the
advent of the Uh, original forms of artificial intelligence,
not the ones we know today through LLMs and
so on. Um, THERE was a big step in
reducing to getting rid of all the biology, all
the social aspects of cognition, and reduce it to
like a pure, I would say, abstract form, uh,
characterized in those years, like, for example, chess playing.
So you have a very well delimited. Space in
which things are happening with the specific units that
move according to certain rules and then the reasoning
behind would be in principle captured by just this
move and these formal properties. So, then of course
we, we learned that human mind doesn't work that
way, incorporates multifaceted forms uh that are important to
consider and therefore the over-reductionistic step. Was reduced or,
or what was, let's say, lifted and went to
a less reductionistic step and so on, including these
other things. In the case of language, for example,
one interesting approach has been the Um, consideration of
gesture production, like what's happening with my hands right
now, in which, uh, you know, all of a
sudden, uh, we can understand much more about linguistic
meaning, linguistic communication, psycholinguistic aspects, uh, cognition in general,
learning, etc. um, AND through the, uh, more encompassing,
richer approach to the study of language and mind.
By considering, for example, the motor action co-produced with
speech, which is gesture production. So, that's a way
of including sort of embodied aspects that have been
left out by focusing exclusively on, on, let's say
grammar and syntax, for example. So, in each area,
you would find similar tendencies in which things become
more complicated, but less reductionistic, and one role there
is played by incorporating the bodily features of, of,
of the mind.
So let me ask you now about time and
space and how we process them cognitively. So is
there any cognitive relationship between time and space?
Um, YES, there is. Uh, SO, um, so one
way of analyzing this is, for example, through, uh,
Expressions, linguistic expressions. So how is it that humans
um communicate and interact. Um, WHEN they talk about
or think about space or time. And, um, interestingly,
uh, when you look at details of how linguistic
expressions, um, are constructed and, uh, construed, um, you
would realize that often. Very much, very often, uh,
and rather universally with details that we can talk
about if you want, but that, um, spatial features.
Of the human, human cognition, um, like front and
back and up and down and, and so on
and so forth. So all these spatial relations that
we conceive are recruited to anchor, um, more abstract
forms, in this case, temporal notions like tomorrow, the,
the, you know, next winter, uh, and so on
and so forth. So, if you analyze those in
more detail, you will realize there's, they're not random.
They're, uh, organized according to certain patterns. And, uh,
just to give you an example, in English, um,
you know, the words, let's say you could, and
this is not just purely linguistics actually, not purely,
um, uh, lexical with words. So, I could maybe,
you know, talk to you and say, oh, when
I was a kid, I had a bicycle, uh,
a red bicycle, but maybe when I say I
was a kid, I may be pointing behind me.
And that pointing is abstract in the sense that
right behind me physically, there is a white board
there with stuff written on, um, or, you know,
I may also be saying, well, from here now
or this person has all the future in front
of her and may point to the front of
me characterizing that person and so on. So all
of a sudden when you start to look at
those, you see very specific, um. Patterns. In this
case of this example would be uh the recruitment
of an egocentric um front and back based on
my persona, my as a speaker, uh, which front
is conceived somehow as being all those times that
have not occurred yet that we call future, um,
things that are behind me are those times that
have been, you know, considered. Events that already occurred
and uh usually all the pointings for now, today,
this year, and so on, they usually go straight
down to the co-location of the speaker. So that
would be 11 example that is very, you know,
you can study it in many languages and with
there's variations, but uh in which Spatial notions are
recruited to anchor on time and temporal relations. Are
there some, sorry, just to add one, so some
people analyze that through the term metaphor, so they're
metaphorical expressions, uh, but if you analyze, as I
was giving you the example, it is, it's more
about what is called, uh, conceptual metaphor. It's not
just the metaphorical word. Sometimes the gesture production will
be telling you not the word, but it's the
entire linguistic unit uh in which you conceive through
gesture, cope gesture production, uh, these notions of space
and time.
Are there cross cultural differences in how people construe
time?
Uh, YES, they are, and we, we've been studying
that for a number of years. Um, FOR example,
the, the, the, the example I just gave you,
um, you know, it's pretty widespread, uh, in which
events that have not occurred, so future are conceived
as being in front of the speaker and past
as being behind the speaker, but in other cultures,
it's not necessarily the same, the, the same case.
One, study we did long ago, like, you know,
a couple of decades ago, we, we were showing
with analysis, linguistic analysis, but also gesture production that
for example, the, the Aymara speakers in the, in
the Andes, um, is actually have a reverse pattern
that we normally have, which is to have, uh,
all those times that already occurred, the past in
front and the future as being behind them. Present
or will be co-located, uh, but the future and
past are in opposite directions, um, than the, the
compared to the one we have. So those give
you some ideas that is some, these are things
are not genetically determined, and also they're not idiosyncratic
like you want, you have one person over here
thinking of time this way and another person that
way. They are culturally community driven, so they, they,
uh, and they. Most likely manifest and spread and
diffuse through linguistic practices. So in that case, when
you analyze the processing of time and space, it
would depend a lot, not just On the individual,
but it's also where this individual is immersed culturally
and linguistically. So, we also observed, uh, we did
other studies then, uh, in Papua New Guinea with,
uh, um, some of my, my grad students and,
um, and collaborators in Germany. We studied, um, um,
for example, the Yo culture, uh, we were trying
to test whether there will be some culture that
would not have an ego-center pattern. But maybe what
is called allocentric. So, based on features outside of
the body, uh, that would be independent of the
bodily position. So things like north and south or
east and west, or downhill or uphill, those are
all features that are related to all allocentric forms.
And so we did the study and we were
able to show, um, with Keny Cooperreer and colleagues,
um, in Heidelberg, um, we were able to show
that, um, we, you know, we, we could observe
through gesture production that, for example, among the Yo
of Papua New Guinea, a very isolated group up
in the mountains there would actually, uh, conceive and
construe and communicate, um, the idea of future as
being uphill. And uh pass as being downhill from
the position of the speaker. So in that case,
it would be a topographic center form, which is
not bodily center, but it's, it's bodily perceiving, um,
slopes, let's say, in the terrain where they exist.
So I would like to get now into the
topic of numbers, numerical cognition, and mathematics. So first
of all, what is a number?
That's a good question. Um, OF course, it depends
on who you ask. Um, IF you ask a
Platonic, uh, you know, philosopher would probably say, you
know, these are abstract entities that exist in some
platonic realm, uh, that are timeless, that have been
always there independent of human, human beings, and they
will always be there even if we all die
tomorrow, all humans, let's say. You know, if you
ask maybe mathematicians, they would just start from axioms
and start talking about the properties of different number
systems, uh, you know, real numbers, natural numbers, complex
numbers, uh, you know, transfinite numbers and so on.
Uh, BUT if I take the question more like,
well, what is it cognitively? Um, WELL, in this
project that we've been working on now with the
colleagues from Europe, um, called Quanta, we are investigating
that question more in depth, um, and then this
is, this is, you know, we study the evolution
of cognitive tools for quantification and then we, you
know, we analyze the, the, the, how, you know,
Numeral terms are used in different parts of the
world when they exist, so numerals being the sign
for a number, not the number concept, but how
you express it. It could be orally, like the
word 5 as I produce now the sound 5,
or maybe written if I write, you know, a
Roman numeral for it or an Arabic, uh, Indo-Arabic
numeral and so on. But since most languages of
the world have not been written, then uh we
can consider numerals much, much more interestingly when you,
when you analyze the, the, the sign produced uh
phonetically. So the sound that you produced, it could
be also be, uh, you know, body signals and
so on. But in this case, then for a
short answer, I would say number is, is one
form of exact quantification. A sym that is symbolic.
So, you necessarily need some symbolic resource to refer
to that exact quantity. And those have certain properties
that you could study, uh, and then you could,
you know, eventually they lead to counting, but right
now I'm, I'm working precisely on this project and,
and investigating the question of It maybe it's not
all coming from counting and they're more basic atoms
that we need to investigate cognitively, anthropologically, archaeologically, and,
and also from the point of view of neuroscience,
and that's, uh, that's what we're working on. So,
the, the long story short, number in the most
prototypical form, so the ones that we normally, you
know, when, when we talk in everyday life and
we say number, the, the most prototypical way. Um,
WOULD be an exact symbolic quantifier. Now, of course,
the word number is polysymous in our society, so
you could have the word number when you say
telephone number, passport number, uh, but those are, those
are different concepts, those are different, uh, uh, denotations
of number. Um, SOMEONE may even have uh letters
in some passport, you have letters in the passport
number and so on. So that will be less
prototypical, but the prototypical idea of a number in
terms of uh a quantifier, that quantify something will
be what I just expressed before.
Do we have an innate concept of numbers?
Um, WELL, that's an empirical question, I take it,
and, um, and my short answer is no. Um,
SO the idea here is, and I, I, I
wrote a paper more or less addressing that in
2017. And the trends in cognitive sciences in which
I, I asked that question, but when you start
to analyze, uh, you know, human data from other
parts of the world, uh, you realize that, you
know, many, many cultures around in the, in certain
parts of the world, primarily in the Amazon and
in Aboriginal Australia, would have, uh, exact quantifiers in
a small range, would be primarily around. 3 to
42143, and so on. Um, BUT no higher numerals
for exact quantities and therefore also no arithmetic beyond
that and so on, which requires precision and precise
results. So 3 plus 5 would always be 8,
not approximately 9 or 10 or sometimes if it's
rain, if it's raining 7, but if it's dry
9 and so on. So, um. So when you
start to look at more in detail, which is
some something we're doing in this project I was
referring to, um, you start to realize that you
need a lot of components, um, to put together
in order to get number, um, out of like,
you know, out of the system working. Um, SO
that's why I was trying to, um, in that
paper I was referring to, to make a distinction
between, um, these innate abilities that appear to be
biologically in doubt. To discriminate, um, without effort and
in a precise manner quantities in a small range,
for example, a pair of something as opposed to
3 items of that something or one single thing
from a pair. In those cases, we don't need
counting. Uh, YOU don't need education or learning or
language because you saw these features have also been
shown to exist in many non-human species. So it
shows that that apparatus is something that exists in
a biologically endowed manner, so innate, and We may
argue that perhaps it does have a biological value
in evolution, so in order to uh have some
kind of um feature that would have evolved because
of evolutionary advantages. But that from my perspective is
not number. It's just, uh, it doesn't have a
symbolic feature and it doesn't have counting. Uh, IT
doesn't scale up to lead to arithmetic. So, and
that's why I gave that a different term. It's
based on quantity-related aspects, so I call them quantical
features, in which subitizing, which is the term of
the phenomenon I was just describing, will be one
of them. Another one is like the ability to
compare relative quantities. Let's say a tree that has
more pears and another tree that has less pears.
You don't know exactly how, you're not counting, but
you see that one has more than the other.
Um, AGAIN, this may have had advantages for, you
know, species or individuals when foraging in hunter-gatherer societies
to see, you know, which one, what direction to
go in order to hunter and gather and so
on. So, but that, those are non numerical in
the sense that I was characterizing, uh, but they
are, you know, the largely independent of culture and
language. So those aspects are innate. Um, BUT the,
in order to have number going, then you need
symbolic reference and that for that you need language
and other cultural preoccupations. And the idea here would
be that, for example, in Aboriginal Australia on the
Amazon, in many, many of these languages, those cultural
preoccupations did not, did not emerge because they were
worried about other things and, and in those very
complex languages, they develop. Very fine, uh, and, uh,
complicated, sophisticated linguistic system to grasp other aspects of
human, um, human, um, life like kinship or, you
know, colors and so on, but not exact quantification.
So that, that leads me to think that number
is not. An innate thing. We're not, we're not
born with the, the notion of number in the
sense, but we're born with quantical features for like
sabotizing and large quantity discrimination or relative quantity discrimination.
And these quintical features, at least some of them
would have been the result of evolution, evolution by
natural selection.
That's right. So the idea would be that because
it's so, they're widely present in so many species
um that don't have language and, and so many
of them are not even social animals, so there's
not even, um, let's say transgenerational learning or something
like that. Um, SO, uh, so appears to be
very, very fundamental, fundamental, but they operate in a
small range of quantities that we humans with words
call 321, and so on, but, um, It's probably
a good um origin for them developing other things,
but in themselves, they're just quantical, but they're not
numerical as they lack the symbolic referent aspect.
Mhm. And how do we develop numerical cognition?
Well, it depends on, on what do we mean
by we. So if you grow up in a
society that has schools and writing, for example, then,
right, you're going to be as a, as Normally
as a kid, you will be introduced to new
tools and um in which you can outsource cognition,
for example, by, you know, writing on paper and
inventing pens, and then someone will tell you how
to hold a pen and how to use it,
how to sit, where to think, and all those
things is part of the scaffolding that, you know,
it's a new technology, new in the sense that
For the 250 or 300,000 years of the human
species, writing only appeared, you know, 6000 years ago
and only in certain very specific areas of the
world, so it's an artificial, so artificial in the
original, um, meaning of the word, uh created by
humans and then once you have that. Then you
can build up many other things. So, numerical cognition
would be one such example, um, that has been
historically benefiting from many, many, you know, changes and,
and, um, developments like uh introducing the Hindu-Arabic numerals
into Europe, for example, uh, creating the abacus and
playing with those, uh, those creations. Um, ALSO, um,
you know, developing the printing press in which now
you can sort of print things and develop, you
know, you don't have to copy handwriting and so
on. So, all these things, um, we tend to
ignore when we analyze numerical cognition these days because
we just start from the fact that everyone You
know, has numbers and in their minds and the
kids and so on. Now, of course, we can
also focus the research in numerical cognition in kids
today in the industrialized societies and see how do
they learn, how do we teach them, what are
the main, you know, difficulties and so on and
so forth, but If we need to get to
the bottom, the, the truth is that you will
need somehow a symbolic reference system. You will need
heavy scaffolding um by other members of the society,
which usually in our societies is a teacher and,
and also that, you know, those who produce books
etc. um, AND you will need some kind of
apparatus to handle, uh, abstractions. So, and that's coming
back to what we were saying about time and
space. That also operates with the development of numbers
because, you know, often numbers are also spatialized. And
that's why we eventually we invented, for example, when
I say we as in, you know, our Western
society and, and, well, industrialized society, let's say improved
on the notion of a number line where now
all of a sudden numbers are on space, uh,
in an organized in a line and then you
have You know, specific locations on space characterizing the
uh numerical magnitude of a particular number. So, these
are all things that kids learn today early in
school, but if you look at the history of
mathematics, you will realize that. As I've written in
other papers, uh, you know, the number line, it
was not at all something that came out straight
of the brain, uh, or brain activity, and it's
not, it was something that took a long time
to get instantiated. And uh it's only around the
17th century Europe that you start to see for
the first time number lines and, and people reasoning
about, about those in terms of uh spatial uh
spatial properties.
And so then where does mathematics come from? How
do we get mathematics?
Well, we just talked about numbers, which is one
very simple um form. Well, it's not so simple
when you get into the details, but, um, so
mathematics is uh the way I see it, um,
comes out of a certain type of human preoccupation
that in different parts of the world emerged in.
In, um, in sectors of those societies that had,
let's say, for example, writing systems, um, there's almost
no mathematics without writing, so you need the writing,
and then usually the writing is in the hands
of a certain, not these days, but historically has
been only in a small proportion of people in
societies. So, uh, even in the Middle Ages in
Europe, there are estimates that maybe, you know, less
than 10%, 5%, depending on different estimation, only knew
how to read and write. And the same applied
to Babylonia and Chinese and uh, you know, societies
and so on. So the idea is that mathematics
really comes out of this, uh, sort of abstract
developmental, uh, sorry, abstract concepts that developed, uh, you
know. Their own life if you want, and the
way, the way that is done, as I argued
with my co-author George Lakco at some point in,
in a book like 20 years ago that some
of the tools for anchoring those new inventions are,
for example, conceptual metaphors and other forms of abstractions,
sort of like the ones that I was describing
in a simple way, like time and space in
which something gets mapped and expressed um via something
else. And, um, so, you know, in set theory,
the notion, the basic notions of sets may be
collections or things that are, you know, inside certain
kinds of things like, you know, you can see
things that are inside here like seeds or something
and this being a set of seeds, so. And
that would be um manifested linguistically, so you could
study mathematical text and mathematical talks given by professional
mathematicians and you can analyze the language and the
gesture production and you could start realizing that many
of these things are actually abstraction but anchored on
um simpler forms, normally. And you could study those
empirically with uh, from ethnographic observations all the way
to lab, uh, well-controlled experiments. So, yeah, so mathematics
will be a certain kind of, um, I would
say sense-making mechanism developed in certain societies. And then
they serve the purpose of many things, and, but
one of the purposes that has served since, you
know, Galileo at least is, is science. So, uh,
we, it's a system that supports, you know, as
soon as you get measurements and numbers out of
the measurements, then all of a sudden you have
a mathematical system which is A human conceptual sense-making
form, abstract but based on all these layers that
ground ultimately in this sort of bodily form that
we were talking about, um, to, to sustain this
preoccupations and they have, once you really develop them,
you have a life on their own with new
creations and new forms, so. If I can make
sort of an analogy which is not exactly like
mathematics, but will give you an idea that once
you develop a system, then new questions start to
come up within that system. Um, SO in the
case of this analogy would be, you know, in
football or soccer as it's called in the US,
you could have, you may invent the rule, you
have two teams, you have two goals, and you
have a field with a certain dimensions, but as
you develop the game, uh, then you start to
realize that, uh, for example, oh, we may need
the offside rule, and then when you have the
offside rule, uh, maybe initially it's a very Simple
rule, but then gradually, you know, you invent, uh,
you know, the bar system that we have now
in which you can really see certain things, so
you redefine off, you know, offside rules, all is
based on linguistics forms and abstraction, but it's, it's
a dynamic system. It's, it's an ongoing um creation.
So in mathematics as well, you have all the
time new things being created, especially in pure mathematics
and um. And then, you know, the, the question
is, how are those new things created? Probably there's
new preoccupations, culturally driven, but ultimately you would have
human cognition, uh, bodily grounded, allowing that abstraction to
happen in very constrained forms. It's not just anything
goes, it's very um constrained.
So you mentioned conceptual metaphors there. What roles do
metaphors play in mathematics then?
Uh, I would say roughly speaking, perhaps there's two
types, uh, um, you know, uh, one would be,
let's say the metaphors that you use to explain
things to children. So, or, or new students, um,
um, so let's say something that would help understanding
an idea, but it's not really defining of the
idea, um, in a deep sense. So one example
would be, let's say the step function in, in,
let's say basic analytic geometry, you know, you may
have your coordinates and then you may have a
function that has like this form, so it looks
like stairs. So then you call it step function
because it looks like steps. So that could be,
you know, helpful for kids to remember or new
students of, you know, of that particular other features
of that function, um, but that is not really
altering or affecting the, the very notion of function.
It's just characterizing in this case, the iconicity of
how you draw the function according to certain rules.
But there's another one, another form which is much
more fundamental, and this is what we argued already
twenty-something years ago with George Lakov and we've shown
since then with uh the empirical studies and other,
and other um um experiments that some of these
ideas uh are, some of the original ideas in
many mathematical, um, abstract mathematical concepts are Inherently metaphorical.
So it's not just like an aid to teach
kids or new students, but their very idea is
already kind of like what we're saying with front,
future in front and past behind in which are
anchored inherently in the body position, let's say, orientation.
Uh, IN this case, you have ideas, um, um,
that are inherently, for example, uh, when you analyze
the origin of set theory, which is one of
the most abstract branches in mathematics. When you analyze
the original text um from those people involved in
the creation of that theory in the 19th century,
Georg Kantor, and then, you know, other people who
were around that time, um, you start to see
that many of these original ideas had to do
with how you deal with collections of things and
how you put them together and how you separate
them as if they were physical objects, uh, or
you put them inside things and outside things, so.
An idea here is, for example, the Venn diagrams
that were used to teach basic aspects of, of
set theory, not every aspect of set theory, but
it works so intuitively because it's recruiting these container
schemas of things that are inside and things are
outside of that container as being, let's say, for
example, set membership or not membership of a set.
So those, many of those are, are inherent to
the idea of, of set, of course, later then
you develop more abstract form to try to detach
that from that origins, but you would have that
and many aspects that deal with uh actual infinity,
infinitesimal calculate in infinitesimal calculus, you would have, you
know, similar things in which you anchor on something
more concrete. And that is a defining property of
the, of the concept. So in that case, conceptual
metaphor, not just metaphorical expression, but the, the conceptual,
um, Mapping behind a metaphor, a conceptual metaphor, um,
it's, it's part of the inherent semantics of the,
of the concept.
So I have one last question then. Can embodied
cognition applied to mathematics have applications in education as
well?
Well, um, So, here's, like, again, when we said
embodied cognition, there's no one view or one coherence.
So, if you ask me, they said, yes, well,
if, if you bring to the classroom, and not
just the classroom, to the curriculum development. To organize
what do you need to teach, how you need
to teach it, and so on. If you bring
activities and you, you bring forms that include these
more cognitive friendly forms for learning, many of, many
of which do, uh, take into account, you know,
how we relate to things in, in with our
bodies, how we see them, how we hear things
and noises and so on. So in this case,
how, for example, a lot of the features would
be spatial because we are very good at, as
human primates, very good at discerning with, if we
have a healthy visual system to see things and
separate them and put them together and so on
and so forth. So, a lot of those things
could be. Helped, I would say by um not
starting with pure abstract idea but relating to, I
wouldn't like to just use the word concrete, but
it's more like a Like bodily interaction with these
things, materials and and so on. Now, of course,
one of the features of mathematics is that the
very objects, mathematical objects are, you know, created to
mean something independent of the materiality of the thing.
So, if we want to analyze whether 55 is
a prime number or not, Then that feature of
5 being prime is independent of whether you're playing
with little pebbles or plastic cups or, you know,
or Lego materials or something. So the property is
more abstract than that, but the materiality may help
to con to convey some of those properties. But
here's maybe sometimes the misunderstanding and, and a lot
of people in mathematics education. That they think what
I've seen at least in many panels and discussions
and conferences when I'm sometimes invited to talk, um,
or give talks, uh, is that it's, it's just
the, the pure bodily form that would bring immediately
the. The, you know, the abstraction, so to speak.
And here I think the misunderstanding is that the
embodied part, physically embodied experience, let's say, may be
an important ingredient, but Uh, a crucial ingredient there
is the instantiation of the symbolic activity and resources
on those basic bodily functions. So, for example, We
may think that because, you know, our, let's say,
uh, most frequent base for numbers is 10 because
we have 10 fingers. But I've, I, as I've
written in other places and so on, well, many
animals have what is called pentodactylsism. Penta means 5,
dactyl means the, the digits anatomical in each of
the limbs. And if, if we're, you know, Um,
If we have 2 upper limbs and 2 lower
limbs, then, you know, we would have 5 in
each of these. So, but That is taken directly
as being, oh, there's an embodied there grounding. Yes,
part of the story, but the crucial part of
the story is that we have this capacity to
relate symbolically to this anatomical and recruited for anchoring
quantity and do finger counting and other things. Other
primates also have pentodactyls, gorillas, orangutans, chimpanzees, macaques, raccoons,
you know, they all have. 5 fingers, so to
speak, in each of the limbs, but none of
them would recruit them symbolically to ground numbers. So,
that I think is often what is missed in
mathematics education is that the whole relationship between the
symbolic reference and the bodily activity, um, they both
have to work combined and, and it's not just
like put kids to play with things and cubes
and containers and you will get the mathematics out
of that straight away.
Great, so Doctor Nunez, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Um, WELL, I think if you Google scholar, uh,
you will find, well, the book I was referring
with George Lakoff, we published it, um, 2000s, like
a quarter century ago now, uh, where mathematics comes
from, and, but then many, many things have happened
since, a lot of work and fieldwork, uh, with
respect to the time and space, uh. Um, uh,
THERE'S several papers you can find in Google Scholar
that are, uh, with studies of the Aymara culture
or the Hu of Papua New Guinea, as I
was saying, with different empirical, um, uh, studies that
we did, and then publications, uh, of review of
the, of the many other cultures as well that
I co-wrote with the My former grad student, Kinsey
Cooperreer, um, and then I've done also with other
authors, uh, papers around that topic, and in numerical
cognition, yes, there's also things you find. Um, AND
with respect to mathematics, well, I'm working on a
book that should be published next year in MIT
Press on the nature of mathematics, but um, I'm
still working on it right now.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
OK, thank you so much and good luck. Take
care.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolatti, Gabriel P Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith,
and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.